So terms and conditions you simply sign it.
You said that the client they sign it and then you each get a copy.
This is you agreeing to all the terms and conditions of the contract.
So here's where it really goes into kind of the legal jargon and kind of detailed written stuff about
each legal item.
So I'm not going to read all of this but I'm going to talk about kind of what each one means overall
so you can just have a general understanding of anything you want to modify or add to to make it your
own so intellectual property rights.
This is all about who owns the copyright of the work produced.
And after reading this paragraph it's clear that the ownership of anything that you create for this
project that you're getting paid for is all belongs to the client.
So any kind of illustrations you do or vector art or photography will belong be the sole owner of the
client's rights so they will own that property you can't go off and sell it.
I can't take this illustration and sell it if I want to be able to still own rights to the illustration
and be able to sell it online.
I'm going to have to put that in here.
I'm going to have to change this a little bit and say you know maybe kind of say that the rights belong
to the client but the freelancer has the ability to resell it on such and such stock site.
So you need to be very specific about who owns what.
If you want to get all of your rights away.
This is pretty standard.
And most industries whatever work you produce is no longer yours.
It belongs to the client.
Let's say you do a logo design.
It's not your logo design anymore.
When you send those files off it belongs to them.
They have the rights to allow you to put it in your portfolio or not.
And most of the time they allow you to put it in your portfolio.
That's not a big deal.
But you don't have the right to redo the logo or repackage it and sell it somewhere else.
So this just kind of protects everybody and clearly spells out who owns what.
That was produced and the project so a lot of times when you're a contractor or a freelancer you may
be dealing with a big business and they may have some insider information or some information that they
don't want to make public because they haven't announced it yet.
And maybe your project is part of helping that announcement happen.
So there could be some stuff that they really don't want to get out there into the public.
So this is just a simple statement.
This whole paragraph a confidentiality just talks it pretty much says if there's anything that is is
not public to the world do not share it do not share it during your project do not share thumbnails
of your project along the way on social media.
If it's not publicly information that's publicly known.
This protects the client to make sure that they don't have any secrets share or anything ruined in terms
of revealing information so the next section goes into termination rights.
A win can you stop the project and when can the client stop the project and what happens when that happens.
So the customer may terminate this contract or individual project whenever it's convenient for them
without a liability at any time upon prior written notice to the freelancer so they can terminate whenever
they need to and then all work stops.
So the freelancer may also terminate this contract within 30 days prior to a written notice provided
there are no open projects at the time the notice is given.
So the customer this is C customer may terminate this contract or any open projects immediately for
cause if the freelancer fails to perform its obligations under the contract or if the freelancer breaches
any of the warranties provided or fails to do.
Yada yada yada.
So that the client can cancel at any time if you're not living up to the expectations that are written
out in the contract and they can cancel and make the contract void so this one two three just goes into
specifics about what the process what the process is.
If there was a termination so you can feel free to change this in terms of their specific days you want
to change if you want to change it to 15 or or eight whatever you feel comfortable.
This is where you can definitely modify this contract to your needs and to your liking.
So this kind of reiterates what was mentioned above.
Upon termination of any project or work given the freelancer needs to immediately provide the client
with all work in progress completed prior to the termination date.
So if the clock if the project is terminated you need to send them whatever work you have so far.
The next section is limitation of liability.
This basically goes into something happens there's data lost there's damage some something happens that's
accidental that either party is not liable.
So if the client accidentally deletes my file permanently or does something to my computer and it was
an accident they're not liable.
Same thing with me if I accidently break their copier I am not liable for that.
It's just part of doing business.
As long as it was an accidental type of end of an issue so I went back and added a few additional items
to this contract.
I'm right here in the beginning section and I wanted to add a little bit after project schedule and
pricing rates.
I want to add two things that I've felt like I really wanted to spell out in more detail.
And when you download the document these will already be added for you so don't worry about adding these.
The first one is going to be project scope.
So I wanted to make sure we had a definite way to define the project's scope which is how big the project
is.
So when the client exceeds that or I exceed that there's going to be an additional hourly rate or another
fixed rate revision upward just to protect ourselves from what they call scope creep project scope.
The scope is defined by the description of services which is right up here so everything that's listed
in the services will be the scope in anything that exceeds those services or is not on that list will
be considered outside of the project scope.
So anything outside of the services listed will be considered outside of the scope of the contract and
any additional work or revisions in addition to the stated description of services list will be done
at an hourly rate of forty four dollars an hour.
Or you can have another statement in there that says we will reassess at another fixed project rate
and another contract.
So if you wanted to spill that over to another contract you can.
You don't always have to do additional out of scope revisions at an hourly rate.
You could also do that at a fixed rate whatever you'd like to determine.
That's up to you.
I also wanted to put changes in revisions in here because I want to be very clear about how many revisions
the client may receive in a creative field like what we do what we freelance and a lot of times clients
could take advantage of unlimited revisions and it can really drag out those fixed rate projects.
So this is where you can determine how many revision rounds they get and if it exceeds a certain amount
you can charge them extra or charge them hourly.
So that is all listed here so I added that to the contract.
So that'll be when you download the document you'll have these two extra things in there.
Just want to make sure these were included to make sure you had a very extensive contract.
So there you have it.
It's a very very basic freelancer contract.
You may find other clauses online that might be applicable that you can work into this contract.
This really covers a lot of the good basics though it covers the deposit it covers a schedule when things
are due by each you or the client.
It describes the services that you're going to provide.
And it also spells out the pricing.
So this is kind of the area that you really need to be particular on this is what you really get a customized
to your project.
Spend a lot of time making sure you have as much detail as possible so if there's ever any question
you have to refer back to the contract.
You you're protected and you have everything spelled out so that's contracts very quickly kind of reviewed.
Feel free to download this as an example or you can find lots of other great templates online and you
can use this as a basis to build one of your own.
But I've had fun kind of reviewing contracts once again I'm not a legal expert so I can't kind of review
this from a lawyer client perspective.
That's not what this is.
I'm not a legal expert so just making sure I cover my bases there.
But anyway I'll see you in the next section we're going to talk about some client situations and how
we can best deal with some of those.